# Generation

## Generation policy

The **Generation policy (GenerationPolicy)** determines the tendencies in the data generated by arbitraries. Data
generation by arbitraries is not purely random; the distribution of data is adjusted to enable more efficient
testing. `GenerationPolicy` can be specified through the `generationPolicy` in `forAll`.

The policies available are as follows:

- **GenerationPolicy.auto**: The default behavior, which tries to cover the range of values that can be generated by the
  arbitrary. Subsequent behavior depends on the implementation of the arbitrary.
- **GenerationPolicy.exhaustive**: The arbitrary covers the entire possible range of values it can generate. Refer to
  the "Exhaustive generation" section for more details.
- **GenerationPolicy.random**: Generates completely random data.

Regardless of the chosen policy, the same set of data is consistently generated at the beginning of each test execution,
ensuring the reproducibility of tests.

## Generate edge cases {id="generate-edge-cases"}

The generation of edge cases can be explicitly specified. Specify `EdgeCasePolicy` in the `edgeCasePolicy` of `forAll`.
The policies available are:

- `EdgeCasePolicy.none`: Does not generate edge cases.
- `EdgeCasePolicy.mixin`: The default behavior. Generates edge cases randomly or at a certain ratio.
- `EdgeCasePolicy.first`: Generates edge cases first.

Edge cases vary by arbitrary. Generally, minimum values, maximum values, and special values are generated as edge cases.

## Generate enums {id="generate-enums"}

While there is no dedicated arbitrary for `Enum`, using [`constantFrom`](/arbitraries#constant-from) allows you to
cover enum values.

```java
enum Color { red, green, blue }

    property('enum', () {
      forAll(
        constantFrom(Color.values),
        (value) {
          expect(value, isIn(Color.values));
        },
      );
    });
```

## Exhaustive generation {id="exhaustive-generation"}

Some arbitraries can cover all possible values they are capable of generating. To generate all values,
specify `GenerationPolicy.exhaustive`. When this policy is set, the arbitrary prioritizes the generation of all possible
values.

Specifying this policy with arbitraries that do not support exhaustive generation will result in an error.

## Consistent generation

To always generate the same data, fix the random seed. Refer also
to [Fix random seed](/properties/configure-tests#fix-random-seed).